So in this video, let's have a look at finding our own car setups in Assetto Corsa Rally, version 0.3.1. 
First, we'll have a look at why we should even bother, what's in it for us;
second, we'll have a look at some basic principles that will give you some improvements for just about every car, and we'll do the basic setup for one beginner car, the Mini Cooper.
Third, we'll have a brief look at some more advanced techniques that involve telemetry and analysing our data. I plan to create a few more topic on this latter point because I think it's quite useful and even fun, in the same way as installing different performance parts or playing around with settings on your own vehicle can be fun just by identifying a weakness, deciding on an improvement, and it actually working out.

So first, why bother, if you're not the type to usually enjoy playing around with setups. 
Many players, especially if they arrived at AC Rally from other games like  Dirt Rally 2.0, or other popular racing games are used to the cars working quite alright out of the box, without having to do anything - just hop in and drive, some cars, usually the faster or older ones are a bit more difficult, but in general you are quite likely to get handed a working car that is enjoyable.
That's not what we have in AC Rally  right now -- the cars are in many cases feeling weird, that is bouncy, hard to control, a bit unpredictable. I initially thought that was simply because AC Rally doesn't offer different default setups, like Dirt Rally for example offers different setups for snow, gravel, tarmac... But it actually does. If we look at the Xsara WRC as just an example, there there are several differences on just about any setup page. Yes, there are surface-specific setups for all the cars already. So if you think about this, it actually raises the importance of fixing your own setups. It's not like the feature is just missing and might be added with any new update - they did already modify them for you, they already put some work in that area, so by the logic of software development it means, it's not very likely to get redone very soon when there are so many other open problems and necessary or much-required features. So that means I'd say, if you want to experience what AC Rally has to offer in the next few versions, you need to learn how to modify the setups on your own. 

So where to start, how do we actually learn to work on a setup effectively? I think the best place to introduce anyone to setup work is arguable the simplest car in the game to setup, because there are so few things to play around with, and still you can change the car quite a bit, and people are struggling with how it drives by default: The Mini. In the single player progression, we face it very soon after the start, in Wales on Gravel. The setup that's on it is obviously not working terribly well there. The Mini doesn't give you many typical setup options, as it doesn't even have adjustable suspension, so it would make no sense for me to say always start with this specific option - as the Mini will have quite different options available than a 037 or the Skoda Rally 2. Also, I think one of the most time-consuming ways to improve a setup is to say "this bit here, I'm always losing control in this one corner, I think if I adjust x, this will improve it" - trust me, unless you're already very knowledgable with setups and are 100% certain what is actually the fastest line around this section, this is a rather simple way to spend a lot of time achieving not much, because you'll overfocus on one issue. But one systematic approach you can take is always to start with focussing on your straight line performance, see what's going wrong there, and get that in the right ballpart or at closer, then move to cornering where you also do the same rough adjustment, then repeat and repeat, with the adjustment. That is because straight line is usually easier to adjust, because all you need is a good straight test section of the track type you want to use your setup for. So if you choose your section accordingly, in this case I'll just drive the challenge sector in reverse, you can test that very quickly. And you may think it's not the biggest problem, but keep in mind, once you change your acceleration or braking abilities, this will influence your cornering style in many places; so it might worsen or improve a problem to solve a large simple aspect of your cornering, of course if you manage to get the cornering speeds higher, you may have to re-adjust some straight-line variables. So it'll definitely take a few rounds of adjustment. The idea is to do the large general changes first, and do smaller adjustments later. When you find yourself totally reworking a setting after the sixth round of adjusting, then usually something has gone wrong.
Again, it helps to focus on the simple settings and get them about right from the start, that will probably avoid quite a few rounds of readjustment of the more complex settings later. Obviously, what is also always a good tip is to do lots of saves. I personally like to make a safe of the setup at least every time I improve my time, so I can go back to that if I feel like I'm going in the wrong direction afterwards.

So let's observe how the car drives on the straights. The basic function of the setup here is to allow it to accelerate, and brake as hard as possible, without losing control. So, what's wrong with the straight line driving here? When we take it along this rather loooong straight, full throttle for what seems like a full kilometer, the car in its default setup isn't anywhere near hitting redline in top gear. I hope it's clear, that is no good, it means the car is not geared as it should, we're wasting some acceleration potential. With the Mini that's especially bad as this car's not exactly overpowered and it only has four gears. And as it turns out, in the wet it actually struggles to gain any speed at all when going uphill. So we need to drop the gearing drastically. With the mini as with many other cars, we can enter the setup and we're immediately offered different Gear Sets, 4 in total, which means different pairings of gears. Here's what you need to do with that setting: Ignore it for now, even though the label makes you think this is exactly what you need to change. This is a secondary variable but will not solve the big issue, our top speed. 

That solution is actually hiding in the differential section - there we can influence the diff ratio, which is otherwise better known as final drive. This will influence the overall ratio for each and every gear. It's expressed here as actual tooth ratios, which is convenient if you happen to have such a car in your garage and want to know which gears to buy and install, perhaps not so convenient if you're a beginner simracer who struggles to understand what each setting does. At any rate, let me spare you the test drives: On gravel, for starting out I would recommend the lowest or second lowest ratios, fully on the left end of the adjuster, which gives you the shortest final drive, the one with least potential top speed and best acceleration. Later on, if you find your driving line and hit the top speed, the n you can increase it - for me learning this track and getting gold in all the challenges, it only briefly hit redline in fourth with the second lowest setting, and that's pretty much exactly what you want. This definitely improves the car a lot, especially in acceleration of course. But what is also important to note, this also gives you better control in the corners - the shorter gearing allows you to pulling the car out of the corner, it's a lot better for counter steering that way. 

So we have a car that accelerates faster - so it's reasonable to next try and improve the opposite activity, which is braking, as you'll hit several corners faster so you need to get rid of more speed. The car by default comes with rear brakes set to zero, so don't blame me for thinking they could do a bit more work there. Obviously, a car is braking optimally if all four brakes and tires are sharing the work. Sneak preview, I did use my telemetry tools on that - it's not quite actual zero rear brake pressure that we're getting, but close, you're using about 90% front brakes there, in my test runs without ABS the fronts were generating around 3500N of braking force, the rears maybe 400N. Then I cranked it up to maximum, that is both in the ratio and the proportioning valve - and got around 1000N from the rears, so we're at around 75% front bias still, even with the rears set to maximum. The rear brakes are so weak on our Mini, on gravel you can really safely turn it up to the maximum, it will not make the rears lock first on this car.
For now, this definitely improves the braking distances, and it also helps the car turn into corners better as we're not just using the fronts. 

To do that, since we have no suspension adjustment to play around with, all we have is the tyre pressure, tyre toe-in and the differential. Honestly, I'd leave the tyres and toe-in fixed for now, they're both secondary settings in this regard. The diff however, that is one of the most powerful part of car setup which can very much help to adapt a car to your driving style. It is also probably the least understood part of car setup , especially once you get into the AWD cars with diffs at each end and another one in the center for you to mess up the settings on. Luckily for us, the Mini only has one diff, so it's a bit more approachable. What exactly does a locking diff do? It allows us to either have the wheels locked together to a certain extent, which helps prevent the wheel with less grip from slipping under acceleration or braking, and on the other end it allows to control how far and when they unlock, which we actually want in order to go around corners, as the outside wheel will always need to turn faster in a corner than the inside. The amount of locking is controlled by the diff ramp angles, this helps us accelerate and brake; on the other hand, how far it unlocks when we're off the throttle is controlled by preload, which allows us to have a rather loose or a rather stable car; and how fast it transitions from unlocked to locked and vice versa, that's controlled by the amount of plates.

So since we want to improve our cornering, we can play around with preload. If you add a lot of that, the car will resist turning - that is, it's very stable, but it also won't like to turn especially in the slower corners. Observe how the car feels when you're off the throttle and off the brakes, like when you're in the first phase of a corner, that is where this has the largest influence. This is a good setting for you to adjust if you have problems with the car spinning out. I hope it's obvious, this is a setting that you should play around with as your skill progresses. You can start with a rather high preload and see how that feels, and once you're comfortable with how the car behaves, you can reduce it bit by bit to get a quicker turning behavior. I'd guess if you play on controller and don't have alien reflexes and control precision, then this setting may help you make the cars quite a bit more enjoyable. Once more, the diff is very much where you can adjust the car to your own driving style and skill.


Now let's have a look at probably the most central feature of a locking diff, which is the ramps, which control the amount of locking.  The actual behavior of the diff under locking and at the verge of locking, that is I think a bit harder to observe than what the preload does. This basically influences how much power we can use while exiting a corner,without the tyres spinning out. Obviously, with enough power in a low gear, the car will still spin out, it's not a magic setting, but it might accept significantly more throttle before it does. So what you need to ask yourself  while driving is, do we have problems putting the power down, or does it become instable under braking? I think the Mini is quite stable under braking, but putting the power down - umm, that's not so much it's strength here, especially with the shorter diff ratio. So what we should try it add more locking, which is found here in the LSD Power / coast ramp. The power side ramp, the one that controls how much the diff locks up when you put the throttle down, that is the first number, the other ramp controls the diff lockup under braking - first of all, it's very important to realize, this does not give you a percentage of lockup but an actual ramp angle between 0 and 90 degreese - the larger the number, the weaker the lockup. Once more: yes, it's realistic as yes that's how the diff effect is caused and that is how you order them, but it may not be super intuitive to people who aren't  installing locking diffs into their real car, which I suppose might be the majority of people.

Now, with more locking effect there is once more a flipside: First of all, it makes slow corners a bit harder, because that's where the speed difference between the wheels really comes into play. But perhaps more significantly - with a strong locking diff yes you start losing traction much later - but with a less stronger lockup, you're just spinning one wheel, the one on the inside. That is usually quite harmless, perhaps you don't even notice it especially with a front wheel drive car. However, with a more locked diff, once it spins out, it usually spins both wheels. On a Front Wheel Drive car like the Mini that means, you're plowing straight ahead before the corner has actually ended; on a rear wheel drive you will now start to oversteer. So any issues with your throttle control will become apparent once you install a strong locking diff ramp.



In a later round, we can also play around with the pads. As we're noticing the rear brakes are getting underused, we definitely want to keep the soft pads there, but we can install medium or even hard pads in the front. That again shifts the brake bias a bit further to the rear, and it has the added bonus of keeping a more even temperature distribution. That means in theory, we have a more constant bias during our run because otherwise we might get even more front bias at the end of a run, from the front brakes heating up quicker and reaching their optimum working temps before the rears. 

At that point we should vary our proportioning setup a bit, when we're running in the dry at least, where you use more brake pressure. I think it's perfectly alright to use 80% proportioning factor and start at the maximum proportioning valve pressure, which is 4.00kPa. That gives us the best possible braking. Ok, now that we solved quite a few of our straight line issues with those two settings, the car is already a bit nicer to drive on dry gravel already, and as I said, these brake-line issues tend to spill into the corners so there is also an improvement there, for example at the end of this braking zone the car will want to turn in better with more rear brakes. But we can still have a look to improve our cornering performance. 



At any rate, that should give you quite a few options to adjust the handling of the car, and if you really want to get it spot on, you can also adjust the number of friction plates. I'll tell you my own setting for getting gold in the rain: lowest ramp angles, that is the most luckup, and a rather low preload, like 50 Nm. The Plates I just put to maximum.

One more things that gets absolutely routinely played around with in any real life motorsports and yet isn't so often modelled in games is the tire pressures. In real life, it's primarily modified to influence the actual running temperatures of the tires, as a less inflated tire will heat up more - but even with the tire temperature simulation deactivated at the moment in AC Rally, you should try the effect that two or three clicks on either end of the car have for performance, because this does influence grip and the internal damping of the tyres. This adjustment is way more sensitive to lowering the pressure than it is to increasing it, so you can ruin your setup much easier by lowering the pressure than by raising it. However, I think it makes sense to do just that with our Mini - with both tire pressures reduced by just one psi, the car may feels more stable and less keen to fly into the air like an overinflated basketball after each bump, and I don't feel it's really down on grip, so perhaps if you're getting a lot of jumpiness from the car, that may help with that a bit.



So as promised, we'll have a look at some telemetry. We'll have a look at how to optimize the first two items here, that is the gearing and the brakes. By the way, if you think "I'm using ABS anyways, so why should I worry about my brakes" - no worries, I'm not going to actually, this setting improves how the brakes work even with ABS, as what we're doing basically allows the brakes to work harder before the ABS even kicks in.

But let's start at the gearing. Here, as the setup options are in fact the same for the car on each surface, I have just taken it to Alsace and did a few test runs to see what all the gear sets do.


They are labelled in order of temperature so to speak, so blue is our set one, yellow is set two, orange is set three, and red is set four. We see that in the top gear, the group with the highest top speed, the lines are pretty much on top of each other, which indicates they use the same ratios in 4th gear, which also should make clear why playing around with this won't solve our top speed problem, at all.  So for third gear, we notice differences: set 1 is tallest, then comes set 2, followed by sets 3 and four. That order stay the same also for gear two, except gearset two seems slightly taller than set one here. In the lowest gear, gearsets one and two are using the same rather long gearing, and gearsets three and four use a shorter first gear with set four seeming a bit shorter. But the picture is clear: All sets will give th same top speeds, but Set 1 gives us the longest gearing generally, set two a bit less tall with a longer second gear, set 3 is shorter than sets one and two everywhere, and set 4 even shorter. Again, you can resolve all that easily just by selecting the gearsets, driving and noting your speed in each gear. But the big question is of course, which is faster?

I have actually done four quite ok runs, all not perfect, with these four gearsets and recorded the result. They are all within a second or so and they are varying in their sector times quite a bit, so really not clear which gearset is the fastest just by looking at the times alone. My telemetry offers us a few ways to analyze this. First we can look at the speed per gear histogram here, which tells us which speeds are driven how long in each gear. One good way to spot an improvement is if a gear is used just about never, especially if you're working with a four-gear transmission. Obviously, gear one is just about never used for anything other than setting off the line, I use it in absolutely no corner as second gear gives good enough acceleration for me if I find traction, I think there is no way around that, wouldn't make sense to employ first gear more just for the hell of it. But fourth gear is also very underused in many gearsets. If we compare the sets, the ones that uses it the best are sets 3 and 4 - no wonder there, they run out of third gear earlier, and in set four it makes no sense to actually shift back in the one kink in the final straights where I usually would select third gear.

Generally, the most used gear on this section is third, and it's critical IMO that we use it as well as possible. That means, we shouldn't use it in too low rpms, and we should have a good connection to the fourth gear which stays the same for all the gear sets; that means we want the 25percentile and the median values to be quite high. Once more, having nice and high rpms for gear three that's where gearsets three and four are best. That's quite interesting, now let's see how well they connect to gear four -  there it's gearset two that works the best, followed by gearset three. So I think we have a winner there that seems to work best for most gears - and that is set three.

In terms of braking, I already mentioned that the brakes are really front-biased. How can I tell, I mean with the short wheelbase and those tiny wheels on the mini it's not so clear what's going on? Well, using telemetry and using no ABS I can check what's going on with the tyres, which end is starting to lose traction first. For


Well, telemetry tool offers one method that can give us a hint: You record yourself with your favorite gear set doing a clean drive on the track, and then you look at the histogram of speed per gear. The idea is, we want to use all our gears as evenly as possible, so that we have the best overall power available. The opposite would be, for example, we briefly shift through gears 1, 2,3 only once at the start and then spend lots of time in gear four; it would obviously be faster then if we made the lower gears taller. So when looking at my histogram for gearset four there, I noticed that gear three is a bit overused actually, and gears one and two hardly see any action. Luckily, gearsets one and two actually fix that - I myself am selecting gearset two, I think it's starting to look a lot more even, and yes it actually shows when driving. So with that, I hope this helps for getting started with the setups in Assetto Corsa. Again, you can find my telemetry tools for free at my github page, you'll find the link here or in the description box. I'm actually planning to do a series on the cars in the game with my own approach, as I think there is nothing like it available so far, and there are quite a few cars that definitely need a better setup - such as the Peugeot 208 Rally 4.

So now that we got a well-controllable Mini, how about we have a look at the other total beginner car, the Peugeot 208 Rally 4 on Forêt. Coincidentially, this can teach us about lots of stuff that wasn't adjustable on the Mini, namely suspension and damping adjustment. On the other hand, the gearing on this car is set in stone, so we don't have to play around with it; if anything, it's maybe a bit too short for this track; so in terms of straight line performance, we can focus on the other most obvious problem, which is braking. For reasons unbeknownst to me, the car comes with medium friction brake pads. Let's use the soft ones for now, that will give us a bit more bite. Then it once again comes with a very front-heavy adjustment. Here we can significantly shift the brake bias forway using the proportioning valve. I find that 5.5 bar is a really good place to start on tarmac, but you should see if you can push that even higher without running into problems. Now, this in itself improves braking quite a bit, but this is also good spot for learning a few things about weight transfer. In an ideal world, under braking as little weight as possible would shift towards the front, so the rear tires and front tires can evenly balance the braking load. What resists the weight transfer under constant, long braking is primarily the spring rates, and the amount of weight that tries to shift to the front is influenced by the ride height. Now let's have a look - at the spring rates in the default setup - yes, you're not mistaken, 32000N/m, that is a rather low spring rate for a racecar. Just think about it, if a 60kg person sat on the fender, the car would go down by like 2 centimeters, which is quite noticable.  I wouldn't be surprised at all to find such spring rates on like mild aftermarket lowering springs, or even stock on a mildly sporty hatchback from the factory; so on the other end I would find it quite surprising to find them in an actually rally competition car on a tarmac stage. Obviously the grip level is quite a lot higher using racing tires than on a stock hot hatchback, so quite obviously, we can and should increase the spring rate to account for that. This will not only handle the weight transfer under braking better, but also under acceleration, and hard cornering at higher speeds; also it will make the car turn in quicker, also it allows us to lower the car over this rather flat and even stage - so yes, hard springs do have a lot of purpose. The maximum we can put on is not even double the spring rate, around 5400N/m - I think that's more like it, that's our actual starting point. Now, let's test the braking - yes, this actually improved things quite a bit, but it's clear, to even get to the braking zone there is already a bit of weirdness that we need to deal with eventually. And here we enter the subject that I guess is least understood in setup - damping. I have to say, I only recently learned how to do it myself in AC Rally, which gives you a lot more control than for example Dirt Rally 2, where you're just clicking the rate up plus or minus a few tiny steps until you're happy. Here you can basically revalve the dampers, you have a huge range of adjustment, and once more it's far from certain the default setup is even in the right ballpark. With the Peugeot, after my own testing I can actually tell you: it's not. Our best bet is to rework it completely. And actually, the best tip I heard for setting up a racecar from scratch is to start at damper settings that are definitely too low, the dampeners not doing enough to control the movement. The thinking is: Damper rates a bit too low are DEFINITELY not as much of a problem as them being too high, so you definitely want to find the setup from that end, not from the terrible-to-drive side. Then you find a strong bump that will noticably shake the car, in our case I'll use the bumps in Foret full directly after the start, which is actually two bumps. With the fully open setup, we see the car bounces up and down a few times there. The aim is to increase the slow rebound rates until the car only does like two or three noticeable bounces. We'll do that first at the axis where most of our mass is, which is the front on the Peugeot; then we'll do the other end. At that point, we can add the slow bump rates to a reasonable amount - the rule of thumb is that they're most likely going to be between a half and a third of the rebound rates, so you can pick something in that range - again, preferably stay lower, that is closer to a third of your rebound rates. Now drive the car for a while. We haven't adjusted the high speed damping yet, but I think this already feels A LOT more planted than the original setup, which used MASSIVE rebound rates. One can say, the slow damper controls are influencing how the mass of the car is controlled, so a bump like that would make the car bounce and we're resisting that movement of the slow-moving mass. The other set of controls, the high speed ones, are controlling not so much the car but the wheels, which is the much smaller mass here and will pick up speed much faster. As right now the wheels are very free to move, they will actually jump away from the surface and lose traction. The way we initially counter this is using the fast bump, as that provides resistance against the wheels actually starting to move so much. A really good place to test this effect is somewhere where we have an uneven road that we accelerate over - with the fast bump too slow, the driven wheel will skip over the uneven surface and we can easily hear that. 